"I HAVE FIVE DRAWERS IN MY MIND.
THE THREE TOP DRAWERS I OPEN ALL THE TIME.
THE FOURTH, LESS OFTEN.
I CLOSED THE BOTTOM DRAWER MAY 8TH, 1945
AND HAVEN'T OPENED IT SINCE."
REPORT FROM "NO. 24"
-Hi. We are ready.
-Hi. Yes.
-Can you put the mic on?
-Yes. We'll be out soon.
-Great, thanks.
-Yep.
-Ready, Gunnar?
-Yeah, yeah.
I'm ready.
Are you good?
Yeah, I'm better.
It goes after a while.
Yeah.
-Pleased to meet you. Welcome.
-Yes.
-Thank you, thanks.
-Hello, I'm Petter.
-Hi, welcome.
-Petter. Hi.
Shh.
Yes, yes.
Were you expecting old folk here, huh?
Let's talk about, uh… values.
Are you tired yet?
This is incredible.
What?
NAZI BOOK BURNING
CAUSES INTERNATIONAL WORRY
Book burning?
I got a book from my father.
A guy called Langhoff,
who has written about his stay
in a German concentration camp.
They'll burn that in no time.
Concentration camp?
Yes. It says they've been detaining folk
who are against the regime.
Communists, then?
A mix of people, I think.
It's called The Peat Bog Soldiers.
Køhn has it in his bookshop.
Or I can lend you mine.
I understand they're doing that, um,
to keep the communists under control.
It's the same here as well.
Or else, I mean, it's Moscow for us all.
You're not hearing what you're saying,
are you?
Shouldn't people be free
to say what they want?
Sure. Sure.
This is not about communism.
We should be allowed to speak
and not go to jail.
Yeah, but you get what I mean, right?
No, I don't know what you mean.
Let's boil the water.
Yeah, here you go.
I went to
the same school as you over 70 years ago.
We lived in a democracy.
But… some of us felt it
starting to tighten around us.
Does everyone here feel secure?
Yes, good.
I also felt most secure.
All companions of mine,
they also felt secure,
right to when we were not any longer.
For, of course, we thought
we were living in a post-war state,
when we suddenly became aware
we had been living in the interwar state.
And the Germans trooped in
the 9th of April, 1940.
They needed barely 800 soldiers
to take over Oslo.
Yes, about twice as many people
are sitting here.
In a war,
you have to figure out if you want
to accept the situation you are in…
and to embrace what's going
to become your new reality…
or stand up against it
and thus risk everything.
I continued to go to work.
But I had a hard time concentrating.
Everybody out!
Come on, everyone!
You're not easily startled, are you…
Sønsteby?
One can feel a little defiant at times.
And how defiant would that be, exactly?
Somewhat defiant.
There are a few of us who have talked
about taking a trip out to Marka.
Would you be interested in coming with us?
What else could we do?
We had to try to fight back.
Sønsteby. Here.
Yup.
But the Germans were
already everywhere.
-Get down.
-What's that?
Bomb!
-Run!
-Move it!
Keep going!
It was futile.
Form a line! Form a line!
-Fall back!
Watch out!
We didn't stand a chance.
Here!
Move it!
Retreat! Retreat!
Retreat!
-Stop!
-There'll be covering fire!
We were so damn unprepared.
And I promised myself
that I would never again
be so unprepared for anything.
I myself got pneumonia
and terrible sinusitis.
In fact, I was told not to move
for two whole years.
People say that health is
the most important thing.
PRIME MINISTER QUISLING
EXPLAINS POLITICAL PLANS.
But that's not true.
Peace and freedom trumps everything.
And after two months or so,
I met other men who were just like myself.
This is London.
On days like these, there
are probably many people in Norway
who are trying to keep their spirits up.
Or are they beginning to lose heart?
And they were Knut Haugland,
who I knew from Rjukan,
and Max Manus,
Andreas Aubert,
Gregers Gram,
and Tallak, Edvard Tallaksen.
Oh, I missed that one.
Here I put my background
as an accountant to good use.
I became Erling Fjeld,
Gunnar Lier, Harald Sørensen.
The bakery in Grønland,
with Reidun Andersen in charge,
became a hub for us.
It was all well we were making
a newspaper, but we wanted better.
The Norwegian government
had fled to London.
I got word
that they had a representative
at the British legation in Sweden.
NORWAY - SWEDEN
I wanted to meet him.
THE BRITISH LEGATION - STOCKHOLM
We need to build up
a network in Oslo.
All right.
But if you would rather go to England
to be trained in sabotage,
I'm certain we could send you over there.
-Thank you, but I will stay in Oslo, sir.
-Okay.
Your codename is…
Number 24.
There you go.
Your first assignment.
BANK OF NORWAY
-Forfang.
-Erling Fjeld.
Ivar Thidemansen has asked me to meet you.
Yes.
So, why are you here, then?
The Norwegian government
in London has employed me
to come to you to borrow
the banknote printing plates.
You… wish for a loan of our printing
plates for the Norwegian banknotes?
Yes.
Resistance work costs money,
as you can imagine, sir.
And we also need a sample
of the paper being used.
Hello, Miss Løberg?
Thank you for an… interesting chat.
What must I do for you to trust me?
This meeting is over.
Miss Løberg will show you the way out.
Mr. Fjeld?
Your grandchildren will
be speaking German.
What was that?
You do understand
that if action is not taken now,
your grandchildren
will be speaking German?
Here, you have a chance
to stand on the right side of history.
How do I know that you are
a representative of the government?
How can I be sure of that?
-You will have to trust me.
-Ah.
Easy for you to say.
If this goes wrong, I'll get shot.
And the bank manager and the entire board.
That goes for all of us.
If you are who you say,
then make the speaker from London
say this on the radio
the day after tomorrow.
Then I will consider the matter.
THE ETERNAL LONGING
This is London.
In days like these,
it's important to keep your spirits up.
Here are 16 special messages.
One. A man you can trust.
Two. A long spear in the fist.
Three.
The eternal longing.
Four. Looks like a school.
Five…
I hope that you know what you're doing.
You have until Thursday evening.
So, uh, where are we going today?
Please go to Kongsvinger.
-Hmm.
-I have a package to get to Sweden.
So send that, then.
It's here.
A festive meeting
in the town hall.
National commissioner Terboven
and Minister President Quisling
were photographed together
as the company's protectors.
Under the leadership of Captain Maxvik,
the company marched
through Oslo's streets.
Hirden's school in Kongsvinger
has completed a soldier training course.
Chief of State Police Marthinsen
handed out letters of appointment
to the new troop leaders
and superintendents.
That man is worse than Quisling.
Then followed by a simple social evening.
Marthinsen
was head of the State Police
and also the supreme leader
of the Hirden.
He allowed his people
to torture Norwegians.
And the Norwegian Nazis were quite
frequently worse than the German Nazis.
I could not understand
how our fellow countrymen
could collaborate
with those who had occupied us.
It made it difficult to know who to trust.
The government in London needed
eyes and ears in Oslo.
And I was appointed leader
of our little organisation.
The information was collected
and then smuggled over to Sweden.
And from there,
transported on to London.
But the Gestapo had now become aware
of the resistance movement
that was building up.
Our people were arrested
all over the country.
The Germans wanted
to get hold of those in charge.
Turn him.
Why Hornbæk?
Why can't he just drive to Kongsvinger?
Andreas wants to talk to you.
He said that…
He said…
What was that?
The Germans poured boiling oil
up Kristian's rectum.
Andreas' brother.
He burned from the inside.
Andreas.
Condolences for Kristian.
He was outstanding.
Yes, he was.
What kind of people would do that? Hmm?
Who does that?
All of us understand if you want out.
Out? What are you talking about?
I want to do the hard things. You follow?
-Hi.
-Hello.
She's here.
Okay.
Hello.
Krogh.
Gudrun Collett.
Krogh?
But isn't it Fjeld?
Krogh, Fjeld, um…
Five pockets, one for each man.
Then it's just a matter
of keeping them straight.
You fix things?
Yes. Well, you might say that.
-You need access to more apartments?
-Yes.
Why so many?
I never sleep two nights
in the same place.
Through Mrs. Collett,
I got access to a network of apartments.
I just followed the logic of the Germans.
For their job was all day, every day
to methodically search,
trying to predict
where we could be found and get to us.
The Germans usually came to get people
between four and six in the morning.
So I got up every day at half past four.
I was out on the street
within a few minutes,
and then I usually went into the woods
to get a few extra hours of sleep
before heading back to the city.
We open again in the morning.
Closed.
Thank you so much, miss.
Ah…
It's a lovely scent of baking.
Mmm.
May I?
Reidun?
Please.
Get the prisoners.
Next.
Do you know who this is?
Look at him.
Next.
What about him?
I don't know.
Are you sure?
Mmm.
No.
-I didn't say anything.
-Uh…
Anything.
Okay.
I saw several of ours.
I saw Solnørdal.
I don't know how long he can hold up.
They'll do anything
to find out your real identity.
Okay.
Mmm!
What are you up to these days?
You don't want to know.
But, um… you were given permission
for travel to Rjukan?
Look…
I…
There are a lot of people looking for me.
And there will more,
I'm inclined to believe.
And I can't quite shake the thought
that they could come and…
and that they could come here after you.
You have to do your job.
And we will do ours.
-Hi, Gunnar.
-Hello.
For the good cooperation between
the German and Norwegian law enforcement,
It is very important, Mr. Marthinsen,
that we quash
this terrorist activity together.
Mmm. Yes.
Did you get
everything he knew?
That's impossible to know.
No, it's not.
You just have to make an effort.
They'll sing like sparrows.
-Excuse me for a moment.
-Yes, certainly.
Come here.
It's chilly here, right?
What?
The name of your boss?
Who is your leader?
His full name.
G… Gu…
Gunnar.
We need the surname as well.
S… Sønsteby.
-Gunnar Sønsteby?
-Yeah.
There you go.
That wasn't so hard.
Apologies for the interruption.
Not at all.
But I'd say
the wait was worth it.
GUNNAR SØNSTEBY
REWARD: 200 000 KR.
Stop.
Papers, please.
Uh…
Okay. Go on.
Please come in, Sønsteby.
Get after him!
Stop!
LEUCHARS, SCOTLAND - 1943
Just get inside and dump them.
These aren't…
Idiot! Do you know that? Leave this!
Kjakabråten.
There you are.
-Hello.
-Very good to see you.
Good to see you.
It was about time you came out here.
Yes, but I'll go back at the soonest.
Of course. First things first, Gunnar.
Erling Fjeld.
Yes, they've asked to speak to you.
Have they?
I tried to tell them
you're an upstanding citizen,
but they're not going to surrender.
Mr. Fjeld.
Just tell us
one more time, Mr. Fjeld,
why you have survived
when so many of your contacts haven't?
Some of us believe
that this is close to impossible.
When something is impossible,
there tends to be
a few obvious explanations.
What are you saying?
Not saying anything, Mr. Fjeld.
You tell us.
I'm a thorough man.
Very few people can be
thorough on this level over time.
-What am I supposed to say to that?
-But you can?
Well, I'm not saying
that I'm better than anyone.
But I plan ahead all the hours I'm awake.
-So do all the others.
-I wish that was true.
-So there's no component of luck in this?
Oh, yes. Luck and good planning.
Do you drink alcohol?
Not since the war started.
I find it is counterproductive.
-You don't need it to calm your nerves?
-No.
-What about women?
-What about them?
Do you like women?
Some agents prefer male company.
-Shocking as it may seem.
-Uh, yes, I do like women.
How many female contacts
have you established?
I'd say about five.
And of those,
how many of them have you slept with?
I find your questions
to be quite personal.
Just answer.
Zer… zero women since the war started.
I find that very hard
to believe, Mr. Fjeld.
Sorry, but I don't feel like
that's my responsibility.
Do you do anything
at all to calm your nerves?
Yes.
I plan and prepare,
as I already have told you.
That's the thing that calms my nerves.
I'm sure you've had
quite enough of this room.
I apologize on behalf of my agency,
but we had to be absolutely certain.
It seems that you're one of those
rare and brilliant individualists
who's able to achieve things
that others cannot.
We're rather impressed.
I wish you nothing but
the very best of luck in your training.
After a few months
of training in Scotland,
I went back to Oslo.
I now felt ready to take
on bigger assignments.
But first, I was to meet the new leader
of the resistance movement,
Jens Christian Hauge.
I got hold of eggs for breakfast.
You can have a sip
of my husband's invention.
Hmm.
He said it helps with everything.
So he thought.
Apart from brain tumours,
it turned out.
My, uh… condolences.
Thank you.
But let's not get lost in melancholy.
It's important to rejoice once in a while.
In spite of what is facing us.
When is he supposed to arrive?
He's coming.
Do you dance?
-No.
-Hmm.
You mustn't forget to breathe a little,
even if it is war.
There'll be a time and a place for that.
Hmm.
You mean one dance?
You won't be getting any more food
from me if you don't dance.
Yes.
-Have you danced before?
-Yes, yes.
-Okay.
-Absolutely.
So you put your right hand
upon my shoulder.
-Mm-hmm.
-And the other hand here.
I will lead first. Now.
Hmm.
You cannot dance with me
if you're stuck.
You must take a breath.
In through the nose.
Out of the mouth.
And again.
Let's try one more time.
Please try.
Right.
-One, two, three. One, two.
-Hmm.
See? You've got it!
Don't forget to breathe.
Mm-hmm. Mmm.
Welcome.
Mr. Hauge.
-Coffee?
-Yes, thank you.
I'm trying to teach Number 24
to breath a little.
Have you turned 25 yet?
Yes.
There's a chance you won't get older.
Have you considered that?
I can accept that.
How do you think you'd respond to torture?
I'm not sure.
That is the only answer.
We're going to work together, you and I.
We have an urgent matter.
Okay.
Quisling and Marthinsen will
forcibly conscript Norwegian boys
to fight for the Germans,
sending them to Russia as cannon fodder.
3,000 men will meet
at the employment office tomorrow.
Ensure that by sunrise,
it looks like a fire pit down there.
Akersgata 55, it's here.
An empty building. It's closed at night.
We're going to blow up the archive,
and that's it.
Gregers, about eight, ten kilos?
Yeah. Ten could do it.
Max, I spoke to Selvaag.
He can get weapons for us.
Yup.
Tallak, you're on
reconnaissance for Akersgata.
We meet here at seven.
Yes, I have a good selection.
Have a look.
Akersgata 55, here you are.
All this must be checked
before we meet up at seven o'clock.
Yeah. Yeah.
Repeat it.
You said that, uh, you and, uh…
You and, uh, Max…
Tallak, this isn't going to work.
That's, uh… No.
I… I smiled at her
because we are in a café.
Is smiling at people not allowed any more?
Is that how it is?
Some of us feel things, even if you don't.
Right. I fully understand you.
Please just give her a smile.
And then when you are done
with the smiling, go back to Akersgata.
I… I was just over there.
-The key you were given…
-Yes.
Did you check if it fits?
It's ready.
Okay.
MAY 18TH, 1944
-Have you got the keys?
-Yeah.
Nice place.
There's people here.
We will proceed as planned.
Do you have to say… Let's wait…
Just need to work through this…
Hi. How can I help you?
-What's going on here?
-We're working overtime.
It's going to be very busy
tomorrow morning, so… And you?
We've been ordered
to check the ventilation.
Oh, yes, yes. That's nice.
It gets really stuffy in here, so…
-We'll get that sorted, ma'am.
-Thank you.
Yes, pass it…
pass it here, please.
You know what?
When I see the young like you,
standing there idle in times like this,
do you know what I'm thinking of?
I'm thinking, "What's going on?"
If I had been young today,
I'd have done anything
to kick these disgusting swines out.
To be honest, it makes me want
to kick you very hard, I'm telling you.
-Hmm?
-We're at work, but thank you.
Max.
All right, then.
-I will have a sip.
-Help yourself.
-Thanks for that.
-Yeah.
What the hell's goin' on 'ere?
No idea.
It's a good question.
And I'll tell you something else.
I would run if I was able.
Then those bastards
wouldn't really be scared.
See, in the old days,
literally no one could outrun me.
-And I was really tough, too.
-Sure.
In 1905, I went to Drammen
and back in a single night.
There was a lady down there, you see.
They don't make 'em like that any more.
Back then,
there was more to love.
They drank milk back then, you see.
Hello.
Hello! Hi!
This building will blow up shortly!
So everyone needs to get out!
-Now!
-Me first!
In July… July, 3rd, 4th…
Maybe was June. It could have been. Yeah.
I was there and back to Drammen,
all in just one night.
July. 5th of July. No.
You should get away from here, sir.
-What did you say?
-Get away!
-Get away! Go!
-All right.
And what do you think
it said in the newspapers the day after?
That's right.
Not a thing.
All those stories that you see
that are published in the papers,
they tell them.
It's the owners.
What to print
and what not to print.
Every single time.
So in the case of war,
well, those papers should be lit instead.
They're mere kindling.
Hello, this is Marthinsen.
To hell with this!
I've had enough!
Gustav Sønsteby?
-Yes.
-You're coming with us.
Just one moment.
He has been sent to Grini.
They know your name.
They know who you are.
We knew something like this might happen.
Take these with you,
and always carry them, you hear that?
You cannot let them take you alive.
The Germans know
about this apartment.
Okay, I'm leaving.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Papers.
The backpack too.
Check it.
Where are you going, Fjeld?
Work.
What work do you do?
Insurance.
What do you think? Insurance?
Have a nice day.
Thank you.
Off you go.
So they didn't recognise you?
Luckily, I look unremarkable.
Heh.
You are many things, Gunnar.
Unremarkable is not one of them.
Do you ever think about
what you're going to do when it's over?
No.
And why's that?
I can't think of that now.
I want a free country,
so everything else comes after.
-It would be wise to lay low for a while.
-What?
I'm just saying that I think it would
be wise to lay low for some time.
Yes, that could be wise.
It's chilly…
What is it?
I got to…
know someone, someone new.
New? What do you mean?
A woman?
I know you don't like it, but…
You know, it is what it is.
I have full control.
How do you have full control?
I've been thinking
of what I have to do if I get caught.
And… I know exactly what I'll do.
No one gets caught, Tallak.
Kongsberg weapons factory.
850 Norwegians are forced to produce
Swedish Bofors cannons for the Germans.
The Allies will bomb,
even if it means killing civilians.
The centre of Kongsberg
will be completely destroyed.
We have a better idea.
But there could be trouble.
We need to get into the factory.
Of course, the Germans have guards there,
but it should be possible to do this
between two guard rounds.
-Hi.
-Where are the goods?
-What goods do you mean?
-Explosives.
-That's inside.
Inside what?
The factory.
Yeah, I've smuggled over 70 kilos
of explosives into my workbench.
Who gave you that command?
No, we… we thought it was a good idea.
We'll have to wire it up
from the inside, you mean?
That's right.
The plan was for us to wire everything
so it's ready before we go in.
Now we need at least ten minutes
more time in there.
That's as long
as the guards spend on a round.
Well, let's get to work?
We have a key.
Yes, but we don't want them to know that.
Ten minutes.
Just five more.
Come on. Finish up.
Three minutes.
-Give me the fuse. We don't have time.
-Okay.
Shh, shh, shh.
-We have to get out now!
-We need to set the fuse.
-Come on!
-Yes!
Here! Here!
HOKKSUND - 20 KM FROM KONGSBERG
Papers, please.
And step out.
Good. Everything is in order.
Drive on.
Hey! Hey! Hey! Hey!
-Wahey! Hey! Hey!
-Come on, then!
-Sing a song to show what we can do!
-Whoo!
Let's show what we can do, eh?
But it was…
They weren't very impressed with it.
-They weren't very impressed with it.
-Oh!
-Understandably!
-New rules!
From here on,
I do not want to see a drop of alcohol
taken before, during, or after a mission.
After a mission, when
everyone is accounted for,
then it's a different matter.
Do I make myself understood?
Are you going?
They want me over in London.
-Do you know why?
-No.
And no fraternising
while I'm not about.
We will be disciplined.
Yes.
Gunnar?
Erling.
-It's been a while.
-Oh, yes, absolutely.
-This is Annlaug.
-Yes, hello.
-Hi. Gunnar.
-Annlaug.
How are you?
We've know each other
since childhood.
We'd go hiking up the mountains
together before…
before, uh, well…
yeah, all of it.
How's your father managing?
He's all right, thanks.
And how are you?
Didn't you have a job with your father?
Well, it became a bit of a mess there.
Now I'm between jobs, as they say.
Yes, that's life.
-These are difficult times.
-Mmm.
Are you off on the road?
No, just running errands.
Busy life?
Yes, you could say that.
-It's good to see you.
-Likewise.
-Well, see you.
-See you, then.
Yes, that's really good.
Thank you.
Good day.
Uh… Your Majesty.
And what are you called today?
-Uh…
-Erling Fjeld?
Harold Sørensen.
An electrician from Grefsen.
Your Royal Highness.
Well, I was keen for the opportunity.
Sadly, I must leave you now.
Hmm. It's an honour.
Ditto.
Have a good lunch.
Shall we?
I took the liberty
of ordering for us both.
Ah. Ah.
Thank you, Your Majesty.
It looks delightful.
Bon appétit.
I hear that you are accomplishing
great things at home in Oslo.
Thank you. I'd like to go back to do more.
Ah, you know what.
I think your need is
greater than mine, my boy.
That's kind, thank you.
And of course, you are going.
You will go home again.
And, God damn it, you must continue
to sabotage as much as you possibly can.
I do hope
they play some Beethoven…
I will never forget that meeting.
It was as if the King himself ordered me
to kick those bastards out of the country.
But before I got back home,
I was to receive another message.
Um…
It was then that Tallak and Gregers…
They had made contact with
two German deserters from the Luftwaffe.
Or at least, who they thought
were two German deserters.
Gregers… died at the scene.
Tallak had been shot right in the face.
And they brought him to Kriegslazarette.
Had I been there in Oslo,
that meeting would not have gone ahead.
I wouldn't have allowed it.
They wouldn't have been killed.
But I was not there.
We don't really know
how one may or may not react to torture.
You crack,
and you're unable
to hide all those around you?
No one wants to be
in that situation, if it can be avoided.
No one can really judge you if you must.
But it's costly.
Your new orders.
Yeah, um, I've heard
that the resistance movement
occasionally had to decide
upon the lives of other Norwegian men.
Um…
Yes.
Uh, have you done it?
Um, have you experienced war?
No, I have not.
But, uh, my parents have.
Then I think that your parents will very
likely understand what I'm talking about.
Mmm.
And to all of you, I want to say
that I hope that
you never have to understand it,
so long as you live.
Because what happens in war is
that subtle differences just disappear,
and things become black and white.
And all at once,
completely different rules apply.
I lost eight of my dear friends
during the resistance,
and that was by order of the Germans.
But how would you have reacted
if your best friends were betrayed?
I wouldn't have liked it.
No.
But have you done it?
Any other questions for me?
These are the worst of them.
They're Norwegians, all of them.
Marthinsen is
the most zealous Nazi in the country,
but we will need more time for planning.
I think we should start with this one.
He's an easier target.
He is directly responsible
for the death of several of our people.
Take aim!
Fire!
I can ask someone else, Gunnar,
if you find it's too unsettling.
We can't ask our men to do it unless
they know we're willing to do the same.
I'll take him.
Take someone with you.
And, uh… one thing we must agree upon.
All of this stays between you and I.
We take it to the grave.
Who's taken whom, when, where, that is
vital information you and I die with.
Do you hear me?
Excuse me.
I saw that you came out from number one.
Do you live there?
Yes.
Do you like it there?
Why do you ask?
Would you say this is
a… pleasant neighbourhood?
Absolutely.
Good neighbours?
It varies around here.
Especially nowadays.
Oh. What do you mean by that?
Have you got a neighbour
who's not so nice?
You could say that.
And how close to him do you live?
Gunnar. It's him.
I'll take another.
Can't you just play a card?
All in good time.
Smart arse.
Ooh.
Thanks very much.
You are welcome.
Wait!
This is for you!
Yep.
Hmm.
Uh… have things that occurred
during the war bothered you afterwards?
No, because during the war I lived a life…
as extreme a life as I could,
so my mind never rested,
and I let very little get to me.
For if I'd done that,
I would have been done for.
Um, well, I was…
I was thinking more that, uh…
the resistance movement
and yourself killed some of our own.
Yes, but have we not discussed
this earlier on before?
Yes, but you didn't answer clearly,
as I see it.
Apparently, it happened on…
…82 occasions during the campaign.
Well, now, I haven't really counted,
but I'd say that's probably correct.
We took particular individuals
who were committed Nazis.
And those who were about to do something
that would ensure
Norway was unable to be free again.
Uh, there was no mercy at all, then?
No.
You can go to number two.
Yep.
No. No.
I probably would
have switched these two.
Astrup and Finn Kaas, I don't know.
-That is the youngest, so eventually…
-Okay.
So non-violence was never
something you ever considered?
Non-violence?
Yes.
Uh, Gandhi?
If you have heard of him?
Gandhi did not fight against any Nazis.
Non-violence is all well and good…
in theory.
But that can't be done
if your country is attacked
by those with contempt for humanity.
I think that's when it matters.
Hmm. Then we can both discuss in detail,
should there be another war
and we two are still alive.
Okay, we'll discuss again
if a war breaks out.
Yes.
Well, let's go to, uh,
Captain Linge and his company.
For in the… the company of Linge,
there were a lot of people from Rjukan.
Uh…
Yes?
But had all the citizens executed
done unforgivable things?
Yes.
And did that sometimes have
any major consequences?
Say, for example, Karl Marthinsen?
Now, where the Marthinsen case is
concerned, it was quite clear.
So, we just
go down Blindernveien.
He usually drives all the way.
Here, we can watch.
And we can hide here.
Selvaag, come give me a hand.
He was responsible
for the Holocaust in Norway.
He sent the Norwegian Jews
to concentration camps.
You can probably call him
the biggest mass murderer
in recent Norwegian history.
So he had to be taken care of.
FEBRUARY 8TH, 1945
How is your boy doing?
Did he win that ski race?
Thank you for remembering.
It's actually today.
Ah, today, is it?
Well, wish him good luck from me.
Thank you.
It's very cold today,
isn't it?
How many people
do you think it was worth sacrificing
simply for you to take Marthinsen's life?
After we shot Marthinsen,
the Germans took revenge,
that was the case.
Well, the reprisals were so severe
that we stopped killing
the next people on the list.
But within two nights they, uh…
executed 28 of us, Norwegian men,
up at the garrison.
Many good members of the resistance…
and some unfortunates who'd done nothing.
Was it worth it?
There's no way to answer that.
What is freedom worth?
Someone in my family was shot
by the resistance movement.
Hmm?
I said someone in my family
was shot by the resistance movement.
I see. I'm sorry to hear that.
Do you know what he had done?
Uh, that… that's unclear.
Uh, about snitching… snitching on someone.
Yes. During the war,
there was a lot of that.
I was hoping you might know
maybe a little more about it?
Oh, yes? What… what was his name?
Erling Solheim.
We have received a letter.
What that means is,
our people at the post office
have managed to intercept
this letter addressed to the State Police.
The sender is offering information that
could lead to you and others being caught.
The letter names you and
several other people associated with you.
He offers to identify you.
No, I'm afraid there aren't
any bells ringing with that.
"To the State
Police Commissioner, Oslo."
"Recently, I have come
into contact with people
who engage in sabotage
and other illegal activities."
But now we should move on.
Um, or see if we can't.
Thank you very much
for your questions today.
"I have heard and read
so much about the bestial acts
"that the so-called Home Front
has carried out."
This Solheim has to disappear
before he tries
to contact the Gestapo again.
Will you take care of it?
Yes.
I believe
that freedom is worth almost anything.
And that is why war becomes
so unbearably hard,
that the fronts become
impossible to overcome.
For it's either freedom
or it's death.
"I would prefer not
to give too much information in writing,
but I can say that
I have information on Sønsteby,
Haugland, and Heiberg,
who I know you're very interested in."
"I also don't want
to involve the regular police in this,
as they cannot be trusted."
"If you could arrange
for a travel permit to Oslo,
then I would come immediately."
"Most respectfully, Erling Solheim."
Can I speak with the two of you?
Can I get a cup of tea?
Look at this.
From Rjukan.
Do you know who he is?
Take a Stapo car with you.
Travel in civilian clothing.
A certificate of service.
Solheim is currently out of work.
-He'll be living at this address here.
-Sam Eydes gate.
-Mm-hmm.
-Hmm. Thank him nicely for the letter.
Then ask him to come
to Oslo to be interviewed.
Tell him that Stapo is very grateful
that he has taken the trouble,
and that the reward of 200,000
is waiting for him in Oslo.
200,000?
That's probably why he's doing it.
You take him out of town…
then shoot him.
♪ Wake ♪
♪ From your sleep ♪
♪ The dryin' of ♪
♪ Your tears ♪
♪ Today ♪
-♪ We escape… ♪
-Drop your weapon! Get down!
♪ We escape ♪
-♪ Breathe… ♪
-Go into the reception area.
-♪ Keep breathin'… ♪
-Go into the reception area. Quiet!
♪ Don't lose ♪
-♪ Your nerve… ♪
-Go!
♪ Breathe ♪
♪ Keep breathin'… ♪
Erling Solheim?
♪ I can't do this… ♪
Hello. Thank you for your correspondence.
♪ Alone ♪
-Alarm! Alarm!
-♪ Sing ♪
♪ Us a song… ♪
What are you doing?
♪ A song ♪
-♪ To keep… ♪
-What are you going to do?
♪ Us warm ♪
-♪ There's… ♪
-Get out!
♪ Such a chill… ♪
Out! Go on, get out!
-♪ Such a chill ♪
-Out!
Come on!
Out! Out!
♪ And you can laugh ♪
♪ A spineless laugh ♪
♪ We hope your rules ♪
♪ And wisdom ♪
♪ Choke you ♪
♪ Now ♪
♪ We are one ♪
♪ In everlasting peace… ♪
I don't know about you two,
but I need a toilet stop.
♪ We hope ♪
♪ That you choke… ♪
FEBRUARY 27TH, 1945
♪ That you choke ♪
♪ We hope ♪
Did he realise?
No.
Good.
Right.
We are free! There is peace!
A Norway in sparkling joy
has celebrated its reborn freedom
in these hectic days.
We have cheered out in the dawning spring
all the longings and hopes
every Norwegian woman and man
have carried in their heart.
Justice will be served.
The despicable handful of traitors
who betrayed their own countrymen…
Mr. Quisling, this is Halvor Rivrud.
He was in Dachau and Mauthausen.
I think you should listen to him.
It'd be best to keep quiet.
Thank you. Thank you.
Hi.
I was wondering if you could
sign this book for me?
Yes, of course.
Um…
Gladly.
Goodness gracious. Well.
You're really interested
in all this, aren't you?
Yes.
Well, I had hoped that you knew something
about my great-grandfather's brother.
No, I'm sorry, dear.
So much was happening
during that time, so…
Yes.
Forgive me.
I understand.
Thank you, nevertheless.
Thank you.
I have five drawers in my head.
The three top drawers I open all the time.
Drawer number four I open less often.
I closed the bottom drawer
on May the 8th, 1945,
and I haven't opened it since.
That's how I've managed all these years.
It went well
for a surprising number of us.
COMPANY LINGE
REUNION 1949
But for some,
it got to be too much.
Andreas started drinking
on liberation day.
Everyone knew who he was.
No bar in Oslo would take his money,
and for 12 years, he went from bar to bar.
Andreas shot himself in 1965.
Yes, I sensed he wasn't doing well,
but I didn't realise
at the time how bad it was.
And it has troubled me for 50 years.
The first time
I met Gunnar was in 1998…
GUNNAR SØNSTEBY
WAS NEVER ARRESTED BY THE GERMANS.
HE CONDUCTED MORE THAN
20 SABOTAGE MISSIONS DURING THE WAR.
HE IS THE HIGHEST DECORATED
NORWEGIAN CITIZEN
AND THE ONLY ONE TO RECEIVE
THE WAR CROSS WITH THREE SWORDS.
GUNNAR MARRIED
HIS BELOVED ANNE-KARIN IN 1953.
DESPITE HIS FAILING HEALTH,
HE ENGAGED IN EXTENSIVE LECTURING
UNTIL SHORTLY BEFORE HIS DEATH.
HE SPENT 70 YEARS OF HIS LIFE
HELPING THOSE WHO STRUGGLED
WITH THE EFFECTS OF WAR.
♪ Feels like I'm fallin' ♪
♪ You don't know what it takes ♪
♪ Someday, you will ♪
♪ Omen… ♪
WHEN HE WAS 94, GUNNAR TOOK A TAXI
TO DIAKONHJEMMET IN OSLO
AND LAID DOWN IN A BED.
HE HAD DONE WHAT HE SET OUT TO DO.
♪ Will we ever forget ♪
♪ Someday, we will ♪
♪ Hold me ♪
♪ Can someone hold me? ♪
NORWAY'S HOME FRONT MUSEUM HAS A COPY
OF THE LETTER ERLING SOLHEIM SENT STAPO.
GUNNAR SØNSTEBY ALWAYS MADE IT CLEAR
THAT OTHER MEMBERS OF THE SOLHEIM FAMILY
WERE ANTI-NAZI
AND KNOWN TO BE "GOOD NORWEGIANS".
♪ Fallin' ♪
♪ Feels like I'm fallin' ♪
♪ You don't know what it takes ♪
♪ Someday, you will ♪
♪ So late ♪
♪ Feels like I'm fallin' ♪
♪ You don't know what it takes ♪
♪ Someday, you will ♪
♪ Someday, I will ♪